Week 3 - Regularization for Deep Models

* This informal script is to give you a quick overview of the slides. 
* If you need a more precise and formal explanation of relevant techniques, please refer to the deep learning text book, Goodfellow I J, Bengio Y, Courville A, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.

P2
At first, we have a question that what is regularization? In general, any method to prevent overfitting or help the optimization can be taken as the regularization method. 
We take the regression example to illustrate the importance of regularization. In this figure, we have some blue dots, and we want to find a function to fit them. The ground truth function is the sin function, but we do not know this when we try to fit these blue dots. So we choose to fit these data points by using polynomials. If we set M=9, we find this polynomial function would be rather complex, which is far from the green ground truth curve. And then we have the overfitting problem here. 

P3
When we mention the overfitting problem, we can easily find that during the training process, the training error will keep decreasing along the increase of the complexity of the function. But if the function is too complex, the test error cannot be decreased and even become worse. This large gap between the training error and the test error indicates the overfitting problem here. 

P4
Here are some effective approaches to address the overfitting. 

P5
\hat{L} indicates the training error. \theta is the parameter of your model. We want to design some regularization here to constrain the complexity of these parameters. R is the regularization term here. We may set different regularization terms, e.g.,  L2 regularization to constrain the L2 norm of the parameter \theta. The magnitude of the L2 norm of \theta is constrained to be lower than a constant value r. 

P6
Actually, this hard constrained optimization problem can be rewritten as some soft constrained objective function like the top one.  By setting an appropriate lambda value here, this soft constrained optimization problem can be equivalent to the previous hard constrained optimization problem.

P7
We can also treat the regularization from a Bayesian perspective. Everything is a distribution, and we have some useful definitions here. The first one is the prior over the hypotheses, p(\theta). The posterior over the hypotheses is the probability of \theta given the training data, xi and yi. The likelihood calculates the probability to have such a training set given the theta. 
The bottom is the Bayesian rule to connect the posterior, the likelihood and the prior. 

P8
In practice, we aim to maximize the posterior. We want to maximize this probability. A log operation is introduced here, so that we can write this formula out into two items: the prior over \theta and the likelihood. The probability over the data could be some constant that can be removed from the optimization process.

P10
Weight decay is a popular regularization in deep learning. It limits the growth of the weights in the network. A term is added to the original loss function penalizing the larger weights. 
You can find that this formula looks like an L2 regularized objective function. This is the weight decay from the researchers' way.
We calculate the gradient of the objective function. There are two items in the gradient. The first one is the gradient from the lose function. The second one is the gradient from this regularizer. The bottom is the gradient descent. We think this update is kind of weight decay. That is because if we look at the first item (highlighted in red), you find that it has somehow decreased the influence of the theta, as both eta and alpha re positive values.
But if we further consider the remaining item, it will be difficult to see whether the weight has been decreased or not. 

P11
We also have another kind of weight decay from the engineers' view. The engineers worked independently from the researchers and they noticed that if you simply decrease the value of each weight on each training iteration, you can get an improved trained model. 
The update step is a bit different from the weight decay in researchers view. Here we only calculate the gradient from the lose function, and then to make an update here. After that, we further shrink the weight a little bit, with some constant, e.g., 0.98.

P12
In pytorch, there is implementation of weight decay. By default, they use L2 penalty. That is the first one (researchers' view) we mentioned. 

P13
We have more different types of regularizations. 

P14
We first begin with this linear classification problem. We have data from two categories, the class + 1 and the class -1. We can easily find out a set of linear classifiers to accomplish this classification problem. For example, in support vector machine, we may prefer a w that leads to a larger margin. 

P15
How about we adding the noise to the input?  We find that if we include the noise into the data,  the data points may have some perturbation, and the noisy data may be across the boundary to influence the classifier and increase the difficulty of this classification problem.

P16
Suppose we have a linear function for the classification problem.  We consider the random noise from the gaussian distribution. The noise is injected into the data, and we can see that for the input data, it will be influenced by the \epsilon here and become x+\epsilon.  This will become a noisy input for this machine learning problem.
But for this noisy input, we still want to achieve the same output as before. We use the squared loss here to measure the prediction error. We can write out this squared error into three items.  The first item actually corresponds to the error on clean data. The remaining two items can be approximately taken as some regularizers over the weight w. This way looks very similar with the weight decay with an L2 norm to regularize the objective.

P17
We can also consider the random noise in the weight. w' equals to w + the noise \epsilon. So we will then make prediction based on w', instead of the original clean w.
We want to optimize this squared error over the clean data in the bottom equation.

P18
We have some simplified expression. Based on the taylor expansion, we have an approximation of f_{w+\epsilon}. If we plug this simplified function into the loss function, we can rewrite the loss function in the bottom. 
In the first item, we calculate the loss function using w over clean data. Then we have two extra items, one in terms of the gradient, and the other high order approximation of function f. Looking at the middle item, it  is actually some kind of regularization over the model. But it doesn't investigate f explicitly. Instead, it penalizes the gradient. Constraining the norm of the gradient will encourage the smoothness of the landscape of the function f, which can be a different effect from the weight decay we mentioned before.

P19
Data augmentation has been used a lot in deep learning. We can have some image processing approaches to generate different copies of the input data. These different augmentations obviously share the same semantic label. You can find that the way to add noise to the input can be as special kind of augmentation. 

P20
Here is the AlexNet paper. AlexNet can be the first very successful CNN.  

P21
AlexNet has 60 billion parameters. To reduce the overfitting problem, one is exactly the data augmentation, and the other way is dropout and we will introduce it later. 

P22
Early stopping is a another effective regularization approach. The idea here is that we do not need to train the network to a very small training error. Instead, we may stop the training a bit early, and that is why the name of this regulation method is early stopping. During the training, we output the validation error. By examining the validation error and the training error, we then determine whether the model has achieved the overfitting problem or not.
Every time the validation error improved, we will store a copy of the weight. When validation error not improved for some time, we will stop this optimization and return the copy of the weight we have stored.

P23
How many steps before we stop the training? This is a hyperparameter to set. By examining the validation error and the training error, we can then design some stop signal without explicitly setting this hyperparameter. 
The advantage for early stopping in the efficiency. We will have this regularization along with the training process, and do not need to have further complex operation over the model. We only store an extra copy of the weight. You do not need to redesign the objective function. There is no change to the model or the algorithm. 
The method of early stopping is very simple. But we also have a disadvantage that it needs the validation data. We need a validation set to measure the validation error, and then to determine whether we will early stop or not.

P24
How to get rid of this disadvantage? That is to say, we do not want to waste the use of the validation, instead, we want to include validation sets into the training of the new network as well. The deep new network is very data hungry, so we want to make sure every data points will contribute to the training of the neural network.
So we want to have the some strategies that will enable us to reuse the validation data.
We start the training and consider the early stopping. We can record the number of steps we have to run before the early stopping. So we then have the second run by using the training data and the validation data together. 
In the second run, we train the network from the scratch with both training and validation data up to the recorded number of epochs. 
Or, we use the weight we just got as a warm up of the neural network training. The stopping signal here indicates the moment that the validation loss is smaller than the training loss in the first run. So that is to say, for the validation data in the first run, we do not use them to train the new network. But in the second run, we have included them to train the neural network. If the validation loss is further decreased and become event smaller than the training loss, the model is already good enough to fit the data in the validation set. Then we need to stop. 

P25
The left figure shows the optimization with an L2 regularization. w* the optimal variable we want to achieve.
For the early stopping method, suppose that we start the optimization from zero. If we have the early stopping strategy, we may have a similar regularization effect with L2 regularization. 

P27
Here is the Dropout in Pytorch. We need to define a probability of an element to be zeroed. 

P28
Dropout is a simple method to reduce overfitting. 

P29
During training, we retain each neuron with a probability p. In test, we need to use all neurons in the network. But the weights in the neural network shall be scaled down by a factor of p. That is because we need to make sure the consistency of the expectation on a neuron.

P30
We have this inverted dropout, which can make the test phase simple. We include this scaling operation into the training stage. So in the training stage, we not only throw away the neuron with a probability, but also scale up the weight by a factor of 1/p. If we have already scaled the weight in the training stage, then in the test stage, we do not need to do the scaling anymore. So it will be convenient for the inference.

P31
We have randomly throw away the neurons in the training stage. But in the test stage, we use all these neurons. So dropout will look like some approach that deals with overfitting by combining the predictions of many different large neural networks at the test time. 
In the training stage,  we can sample and train different sub neural networks in different iterations.  In the test, we will combine the prediction of these many different neural nets.
We define the mask M to indidate how we throw away the neurons, and p(M) stands for the probability to generate such a mask. f is the activation function. The summarization over all masked sub neural network can be approximated as an f activation function over the summarization of outputs by these different sub networks. Thus, to some extent, the dropout can be regarded as the combination of the predictions of many different neural nets. 

P32
This is the feed forward operation of a standard neural network. We have the y as the input and w and b are the weight and the bias, respectively. z is the input for the hidden neuron, and f is the activation function. 

P33
In dropout, we define a probability to throw away the neurons. So we have a probability p to keep the neuron, and the probability 1-p to ignore that neuron. We have a Bernoulli distribution to implement this idea. \tilde{y} is then the output by the dropout.
After dropout, we can repeat the similar feed forward approach, but here \tilde{y} has been already been influenced by the dropout operation. 

P34
Recall the weight decay we mentioned before. It will limit the growth of the weight in the neural network as it will penalize the magnitude of the weight in the neural network. And this is the researchers' way to define the weight decay to include an L2 norm into the objective function.
Compared with the weight decay, the dropout has more advantages. The dropout is scale free. In weight decay, we will penalize the magnitude of the weight. But in dropout, the dropout does not penalize the use of larger weight. When considering throw aways or keeping a neuron in the network, dropout does not care about the magnitude of the weight. 
Dropout is invariant to parameter scaling. Dropout is unaffected if weights in a certain layer are scaled up a constant or scaled down by a constant. 

P35
We mentioned that dropout defines a probability to keep the neuron or not. So if in the neural network, we remove a certain neuron, all its connections with the other neurons will be removed at the same time. 
The idea of the dropconnect is a generalization of the dropout method. It will randomly drop connections in the network with a probability. Instead of directly dropping a neuron and all its connections to the next layer. In this figure, in dropconnect, we focus on each individual connection.

P36
We also define some mask to denote how we drop the connections in the neural network. In particular, we have element wise multiplication between mask and the weight metrics. 
For the training and the test phases, we also want to achieve the consistent in the expectations. We can approximate the output of this algorithm by some gaussian distribution. We calculate the mean and the variance of this gaussian distribution. With some math, you can achieve these two formulas to define this gaussian distribution.
The inference for this dropconnect is a bit complex compared with the dropout method. We need to sample some examples from this gaussian distribution, and then feed the samples into the activation function. And for these samples, we average their responsse to achieve the final output. 

P38
Next, we introduce the normalization. The functions involved in the optimization process are sensitive to normalization. For example, the distance between two points by the Euclidean distance. If one of the features has a broad range of values, and the distance will be governed by these particular feature. But after normalization, each future will contribute approximately the proportionately to the final distance. So we generally want to use the normalization to decrease the difference between the different dimensions of the data to make sure that they could have some equivalent importance in the calculation.
In general, the gradient descent converges much faster with the feature scaling than without it. This is an experience in machine learning jobs, and good practice for numerical stability, for numerical connections, and to avoid a ill-conditioning when solving systems of equation. 

P39
We have some classical normalization approaches here, like scaling the data to the range 0 to 1. Or we can have the zero mean and the unit variance to normalize the data so that they can follow some gaussian distribution. And in particular, in the neural network community, this normalization approach is called whitening.

P40
In deep learning, the whitening for the input data could help the performance of the neural network. For example, through zca,  we can emphasize the information of the edges of the object, which are helpful for the image classification task. 

P41
In this figure, we show the validation performance on cifar10. It can achieve some accuracy around 0.7 the left figure. But you can see in the training stage, the training accuracy is nearly 100 %. So we have some overfitting problem here.  We may have many ways to solve this overfitting like the flip and crop the input image to enrich the data set.
We can also have this whitening approach to normalize the input. Looking at the green curve in the right figure, we find the performance has been boosted to 0.75, which is a significant improvement over the performance in the left figure.

P42
The normalization over the input data is very important to improve the performance.How about the intermediate feature maps in the neural network? We may also want to have some normalization over the intermediate features in the neural network. 
This is a cup game example. The situation is very similar to the feed forward approach in the neural network. We want to transmit some message from the first layer to the last layer. But parameters in the first layer change, the distribution of the input to the second layer will change as result. The message you transmit in this neural network will change, and then this change will influence the training of the neural network. So this it is called  the covariance shift in the neural network.

P43
Batch normalization is a normalization method to solve the problem. BN is over the intermediate layers of the neural network. 

P44
Why the BN is a good for a neural network training. The reason is that BN can reduce the covariance shift. That is the change in the distribution of the activation of a component. So by using BN,  each neuron's activation, for example, the sigmoid activation, will become the gaussian distribution. 
So for such a gaussian distribution, it's usually not active, sometimes a bit active, rare very active. Most of the data will be at the center of the distribution, and thus are not very active. Otherwise if lots of data are active, the neural network may not convey meaningful messages. We want to encourage only some neurons are active. 

P45
This covariant shift is undesirable because the later layer have to keep adapting to the change of the type of the distribution. The covalent shift is actually corresponds to the change in the distribution of the activation. If the input for the next layer are always changing in iterations, then we need try to fit the different distributions in different iterations. 
BN can reduce the effect of exploding and vanishing. Because you have normalized the distribution, you will not deal with too large or small activations. 

P46
We introduce for each activation, a pair of parameters, \gamma and \beta which scale and shift the normalized value \hat{x}. In the neural network, we simply a BN layer if we want, without changing the network too much. 

P47
We talk about BN in terms of a mini batch of examples. So for this mini batch, we calculate the mean and variance of the activation. Given the mean and the variance, we can then normalize the activation, and \hat{x} is then the normalized activation. We further include gamma and beta to scale and shift the normalized activation. It will help us to keep what the layer can represent. That is because the gamma and beta is not the constant value. They are learnable.

P48 
This is the full algorithm as proposed in the BN paper. We calculate the mean and the variance for a certain mini batch and normalize the activation and scale and shift the normalized activation .
For the inference stage,  we  approximate the mean and the variance based on the mean and the variance we have calculated in the training stage. In left bottom, we have calculated the average of the mean of the mean and use it for the inference. Similar process goes for the variance. But the difference here is that we need to have an unbiased estimation of the population variance, and we have this m/(m-1) to scale the average of the variance.

P49
BN has many benefits. In practice, it will help us to reduce the training time as we have solved the conversion shift problem, and we have less exploding and vanishing gradient. So it will help the training, help the optimization. 
The intermediate feature could follow the gaussian distribution. Every normalized value depends on the current batch. So the network can no longer just memorize values. 
You may not rely on the dropout or other kinds of regularization to constrain the optimization. We can also use the higher learning rate in the training.
At last BN can enable the training with saturating nonlinearity in deep neural networks like sigmoid.

P50
BN focuses on the activation x. We calculate the mean and the variance over the activation x.  If we have some scaling operation over w, it will influence the activation x, but with bn, this influence can be removed. 

P51
Normally, large learning rate may increase the scale of the layer parameters, which then amplify the gradient during back propagation and lead to model explosion.
So We should be careful with the large learning rate. But however, with BN, BP through a layer is unaffected by the scale of its parameters.

P52
Here is the BN in pytorch. Also, there are many other normalization techniques. 

P54
In BN, we need to measure the mean and variance for examples in the mini batch. How about the small batch size? If the batch size is one, the mean and variance will be meaningless. For a small batch size, the estimation of the mean and the variance will be very noisy. 
During training and test, we will have an inconsistency for the mean and the variance.  In the inference time, we use the mean and variance that are pre computed from the training set. But this pre computed statics may also change when the target data distribution changes. 
At last for the recurrent neural network, the activations of each time step have different studies. 

P55
As we mentioned, the batch size influence a lot on the accuracy of the estimation of the mean and variance, and then finally influence the performance of neural network. So we can see in this figure if the batch size is very small, like four or two, we will have a very large error resulting from the neural network. We then want to have some improvement over the BN like this group normalization.

P56
Group normalization divides the channels into groups and computes within each group, the mean and variance for normalization.
Group normalization is independent with the batch size.  In this figure, this three dimensional metrics are calculated on the intermediate layer of the neural network. Suppose that we have a mini batch of n examples, and there are C channels, and the spatial dimension is H*W. For BN, we need to calculate the mean and variance over N examples in the blue region of the left figure. But in group normalization, we calculate the mean and variance for one instance and part of its all channels (blue region of right figure).

P57
For the calculation, it is similar with the calculation in BN. But the difference in the set of the elements to consider. 

P58
For BN, if we have a very smaller batch size, like this Top curve, the error is very large. But for the group normalization, since it is independent with the batch size, the performance cane be quite stable along the change of batch size. 

P59
Besides the BN and group normalization, we have other kinds of normalization.  You will have different ways to investigate the intermediate features. Given different ways to group the elements to calculate the mean and variance, we can have different normalization methods, like the layer normalization, and the instance normalization. 